---
title: Antiprotons
author: Owen Chamberlain, Emilio Segr&eacute;, Clyde E. Wiegand, and Thomas J. Ypsilantis 
excerpt: The authors establish the existence of antiprotons and explain their belief that there must be antineutrons. 
intro: From the periodical <em>Nature</em>, published in 1956. 
---





Since the development of Dirac&#39;s theory of the electron and the brilliant confirmation of one of its most startling predictions by the discovery of the positron by Anderson, it has been assumed most likely that the proton would also have its charge conjugate, the antiproton. 
The properties that define the antiproton are: (1) charge equal to the electron charge (also in sign); (2) mass equal to the proton mass; (3) stability against spontaneous decay; (4) ability to become annihilated by interaction with a proton or neutron, probably generating pions and releasing in some manner the energy <span class="math">2<i>mc</i><sup>2</sup></span>; (5) generation in pairs with ordinary nucleons; (6) magnetic moment equal but opposite to that of the proton; (7) fermion of spin
<span class="math">1&#8725;2</span>.
Not all these properties are independent, but all might ultimately be subjected to experiment. 


In cosmic rays, where such antiprotons could appear, some events have been observed which could be due to antiprotons; but their interpretation is uncertain. 


In order to generate antiprotons in the laboratory, an absolute lower limit of the necessary energy is <span class="math">2<i>mc</i><sup>2</sup> = 1.88 GeV</span>, but the mechanism of the collision and the conservation of momentum influence this lower limit, which becomes 5.6 GeV. 
if the process is a nucleon-nucleon collision, or 4.4 GeV, if the process is a two-step one with the formation of a pion in a nucleon-nucleon collision followed by a pion-nucleon collision in which the nucleon-antinucleon pair is generated. 
These thresholds can be lowered appreciably by internal motions of nucleons in the nucleus. 
(Energies are quoted in the laboratory system.) 


When the Berkeley bevatron was planned, the goal of 6 GeV. 
was set, in the hope that this energy would be sufficient to create antiprotons. 


The methods of detection of the antiproton can make use of any of the seven properties listed above. 
It seemed that (1), (2) and (3) might be the easiest to ascertain; (4) would also be highly desirable; whereas (5)-(7) are at present very difficult to observe. 


There are classical methods of measuring charge and mass of a particle that go back in their origin to J. J. Thomson. 
They entail the simultaneous measurement on the same particle of any two of the quantities momentum, velocity or energy, which in turn can be obtained from the observation of electric or magnetic deflexions, time of flight, range, scattering in photographic emulsions, etc. 
As for the charge, it is sufficient to measure its sign and its absolute value in a rough way only, because it is assumed that it is an integral multiple of the electronic charge.


After a detailed discussion, it was decided that momentum <span class="math">p</span> and velocity <span class="math">v</span> constituted the most promising combination for ascertaining the mass.
The first successful experiment\cite{} was performed at the end of September 1955, as follows. 
The momentum was measured by passing the particles generated by bombardment of a copper target with 6.2 GeV. 
protons through two deflecting magnetic fields and two magnetic lenses. 
This ensemble let through only particles for which <span class="math"><i>p</i> = 1.19 GeV</span>, if their charge is equal to that of the electron, including sign. 
The velocity was measured by a time-of-flight measurement between two scintillation counters 40 feet apart. 
The pulse-size in the scintillators showed that the particles were singly charged. 


The chief difficulty of the experiment rests with the fact that the antiprotons are accompanied by many pions&emdash;44,000 pions per antiproton in the most favourable conditions. 
For this reason provision must be made for eliminating spurious background effects. 
One of the most important steps is the insertion in the beam of two Cerenkov counters: one that is activated by particles with <span class="math"><i>v&#8725;c</i> = &beta; > 0.79</span>, and one of a special type that is activated by particles with <span class="math">0.75 < &beta; 0.78</span>. 
Pions with <span class="math">p=1.19 GeV/c<sub>0</sub> have &beta;=0.99, while antiprotons of the same value of <span class="math">p</span> have &beta;=0.78, and their respective times of flight for an interval of 40 feet are 40 &times; 10<sup>&minus;9</sup> seconds and 51 &times; 10<sup>&minus;9</sup> seconds.
Particles with &beta; in the interval between 0.75 and 0.78 trigger the sweep of an oscilloscope in which the time of flight between two scintillation counters 40 feet apart is displayed. 
This time of flight appears as the distance between the two &slquo;pips&rlquo; due to the traversal of the counters. 
From this time of flight the mass is determined with an accuracy of 10 per cent for each particle. 
Up to now, about 250 particles have been observed and the average mass is known to about 5 per cent. 
It is 1840&plusmn;90 electron masses. 


The functioning of the whole apparatus is checked by sending through it positive protons in a separate run. 
These are obtained from a subsidiary target, and their orbits are selected in such a way that they have the same momentum as the antiproton. 


The particles are observable after a time of flight of 10<sup>&minus;7</sup> second, which rules out particles with a mean life much shorter than 10<sup>&minus;8</sup> second, in particular the known hyperons. 
These measurements are thus in agreement with points (1), (2) and (3) mentioned above, and the identification of the new particle with the antiproton is a natural one, although not absolutely established. 


There are also some indications on the fourth point mentioned above, namely, the terminal process of the particle. 
Particles selected as antiprotons by the apparatus of ref. 1 were sent into a block of heavy glass and the Cerenkov radiation generated in it was measured\cite{}. 
This radiation does not correspond, of course, to the entirety of the-energy released; actually it is only a small part of it. 
However, a calibration was performed, and from the pulse size the visible energy was estimated. 
Values up to 800 MeV were found. 
This is consistent with the expected modes of annihilation for an antiproton, and with the energy it would throw into Cerenkov radiation in a detectable form; but it is not sufficient yet for positive identification on that score only. 


Another type of observation on the terminal phenomenon accompanying the absorption of the antiproton was also performed\cite{} with the photographic plate technique. 
Particles of selected momentum obtained with an arrangement similar to that described in ref. 1 were slowed down by a copper absorber and finally stopped in a stack of photographic emulsions. 
Among a background of many pions one particle was found which has protonic mass, comes to rest and produces a star containing six black tracks, one grey proton, one pion of 58 MeV and one minimum ionization track. 
The visible energy released is larger than 830 MeV. 
The total energy released cannot be known, because there are neutral particles emitted; but this amount of visible energy is also consistent with the annihilation of an antiproton. 


Clearly many questions are raised by the new particle. 
Its identification should be further corroborated; it is important to study in detail its annihilation properties for complex nuclei and, possibly even more interesting, the annihilation with hydrogen and deuterium. 
In addition, the cross-section for nuclear interaction and the mechanism of production are clearly to be investigated. 


The existence of the antiproton entails with virtual certainty the existence of the antineutron. 
Its experimental demonstration is a most interesting problem. 
Probably the neutron beam of the Berkeley bevatron contains an appreciable number of them, but their disentanglement from the ordinary neutrons appears a formidable task. 
It is likely that the best approach will be either : (1) to transform an antiproton into an antineutron by a collision with a proton; or (2) to convert an antineutron into an antiproton by collision with an ordinary neutron and detect either the final antineutron in (1) or the final antiproton in (2). 

%% Page citations
1. Chamberlain, Segr&eacute;, Wiegand and Ypsilantis, Phys. Rev., 100, 947 (1955). 
2. Brabant, Cork, Horwitz, Moyer, Murray, Wallace and Wenzel, Phys. Rev. (in the press). 
3. Chamberlain Chupp. Goldhaber, Segr&eacute;. Wiegand, and Amaldl, Baroni, Castagnoli, Franzinetti and Manfredini (to be published). 

<figure>
\caption{
    <span class="textsc">Giant shower of mesons</span> is recorded in this photomicrograph of a small section of nuclear emulsion carried to a height of 106,000 feet by a Navy &ldquo;Skyhook&rdquo; balloon. 
    At the top of the photomicrograph is the heavy track of an enormously energetic iron nucleus in the primary cosmic radiation. 
    Above the nucleus is a &ldquo;star&rdquo; resulting from the collision of the iron nucleus and a nucleus in the emulsion. 
    Below the star is a jet of about 40 pi mesons. 
    To the left and right of the star are heavier fragments of the target nucleus. 
}
</figure>




