---
title: On the Induction of Electric Currents
author: James Clerk Maxwell
excerpt: Oersted established a connection between electric currents and magnetism; Faraday found the connection between magnetic fields and induced electric currents.
    But it was Maxwell who synthesized and extended these two results.
intro: An excerpt from his <em>Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism</em> published in 1873.
---



528.] The discovery by &Oslash;rsted of the magnetic action of an electric current led by a direct process of reasoning to that of magnetization by electric currents, and of the mechanical action between electric currents.
It was not, however, till 1831 that Faraday, who had been for some time endeavouring to produce electric currents by magnetic or electric action, discovered the conditions of magneto-electric induction.
The method which Faraday employed in his researches consisted in a constant appeal to experiment as a means of testing the truth of his ideas, and a constant cultivation of ideas under the direct influence of experiment.
In his published researches we find these ideas expressed in language which is all the better fitted for a nascent science, because it is somewhat alien from the style of physicists who have been accustomed to established mathematical forms of thought.

The experimental investigation by which Ampere established the laws of the mechanical action between electric currents is one of the most brilliant achievements in science.


The whole, theory and experiment, seems as if it had leaped, full grown and full armed, from the brain of the &#39;Newton of electricity.&#39;
It is perfect in form, and unassailable in accuracy, and it is summed up in a formula from which all the phenomena may be deduced, and which must always remain the cardinal formula of electro-dynamics.


The method of Ampere, however, though cast into an inductive form, does not allow us to trace the formation of the ideas which guided it.
We can scarcely believe that Ampere really discovered the law of action by means of the experiments which he describes.
We are led to suspect, what, indeed, he tells us himself
\footnote{
    <em>Th&eacute;orie des Phenomenes Electrodynamiques</em>, p. 9.
}, that he discovered the law by some process which he has not shewn us, and that when he had afterwards built up a perfect demonstration he removed all traces of the scaffolding by which he had raised it.


%% NOTE: shews (sic)
Faraday, on the other hand, shews us his unsuccessful as well as his successful experiments, and his crude ideas as well as his developed ones, and the reader, however inferior to him in inductive power, feels sympathy even more than admiration, and is tempted to believe that, if he had the opportunity, he too would be a discoverer.
Every student therefore should read Ampere&#39;s research as a splendid example of scientific style in the statement of a discovery, but he should also study Faraday for the cultivation of a scientific spirit, by means of the action and reaction which will take place between the newly discovered facts as introduced to him by Faraday and the nascent ideas in his own mind.


It was perhaps for the advantage of science that Faraday, though thoroughly conscious of the fundamental forms of space, time, and force, was not a professed mathematician.
He was not tempted to enter into the many interesting researches in pure mathematics which his discoveries would have suggested if they had been exhibited in a mathematical form, and he did not feel called upon either to force his results into a shape acceptable to the mathematical taste of the time, or to express them in a form which mathematicians might attack.
He was thus left at leisure to do his proper work, to coordinate his ideas with his facts, and to express them in natural, untechnical language.


It is mainly with the hope of making these ideas the basis of a mathematical method that I have undertaken this treatise.


529.] We are accustomed to consider the universe as made up of parts, and mathematicians usually begin by considering a single particle, and then conceiving its relation to another particle, and so on.
This has generally been supposed the most natural method. 
To conceive of a particle, however, requires a process of abstraction, since all our perceptions are related to extended bodies, so that the idea of the all that is in our consciousness at a given instant is perhaps as primitive an idea as that of any individual thing.
Hence there may be a mathematical method in which we proceed from the whole to the parts instead of from the parts to the whole. 
For example, Euclid, in his first book, conceives a line as traced out by a point, a surface as swept out by a line, and a solid as generated by a surface.
But he also defines a surface as the boundary of a solid, a line as the edge of a surface, and a point as the extremity of a line.


In like manner we may conceive the potential of a material system as a function found by a certain process of integration with respect to the masses of the bodies in the field, or we may suppose these masses themselves to have no other mathematical meaning than the volume-integrals of $\frac{1}{4\pi} \nabla^2\Phi$, where $\Phi$ is the potential.

In electrical investigations we may use formulae in which the quantities involved are the distances of certain bodies, and the electrifications or currents in these bodies, or we may use formulae which involve other quantities, each of which is continuous through all space.


The mathematical process employed in the first method is integration along lines, over surfaces, and throughout finite spaces, those employed in the second method are partial differential equations and integrations throughout all space.

The method of Faraday seems to be intimately related to the second of these modes of treatment.
He never considers bodies as existing with nothing between them but their distance, and acting on one another according to some function of that distance.
He conceives all space as a field of force, the lines of force being in general curved, and those due to any body extending from it on all sides, their directions being modified by the presence of other bodies He even speaks of the lines of force belonging to a body as in some sense part of itself, so that in its action on distant bodies it cannot be said to act where it is not.
This, however, is not a dominant idea with Faraday.
I think he would rather have said that the field of space is full of lines of force, whose arrangement depends on that of the bodies in the field, and that the mechanical and electrical action on each body is determined by the lines which abut on it.




